hello maths fans i am back with steve
from black pen red pen hello steve with
the who's super excited as you can tell
to do the second part of our pretend
oxford interview so in the first video
we talked about gabriel's horn and the
paradox of having
a finite volume and an infinite surface
area and steve did really really well on
this question
i think we can all agree he's performing
brilliantly so far so
in the second half of the interview i've
dug out a really challenging question
uh from many many years ago in sort of
the archives
of the oxford interview questions it's
going to be a challenge it's going to be
tough
but you know these interviews are meant
to be and uh hopefully
like with the first question we'll have
a lot of fun doing it
so steve are you feeling ready i am
trying to
yes are you more nervous or less nervous
this time
i will see more numbers
[Laughter]
okay so yeah because i think because you
know there's so much riding on it now
you've done so well in the first one
it's all come down to this
super old school question now what we're
going to
um think about is um to try to evaluate
an infinite sum
so first of all if we were to consider
the sum of one over
n where n goes through the integers from
one to infinity
okay well let me just write this down
i have a little marker shortage recently
so
one over n all right so this right here
goes to infinity it diverges yeah
yes exactly um and then if we were to do
uh one over n squared
uh-huh then do you know what that one
would equal
yes i happen to know that this right
here becomes
pi squared over six excellent yes that's
my favorite um
series the the tattoo on my arm here is
actually a geometric representation
of that problem so this is zero and then
this is one
plus one quarter one nine and then the
end the dotted line is pi squared over
six
whoa that's so cool wow
so i absolutely love that problem it's
like one of my favorite results in all
of that
so we need to know that the one over n
squared is finite
that is the only fact about it we need
which is quite clearly
true because you've told us it's equal
to pi squared over six
now going back to one over n we want to
do the same sum
but now we want to take only the prime
numbers
oh okay so let's see well write down the
sum
as an equals p well actually
i was just ready as this you want all
the primes right so i'll just put down
all
p prime o p prime like this
i think that should be okay and one over
p yes and so we want to try and work out
the answer to this question we want to
work out the
the value of this sum man
i guess a starting point might be do you
have any idea what the answer might be
i am suspecting this right here diverges
because i to be honest i read about this
before
okay so yeah it diverges it's
yeah no you're right there that's that's
that's fine we're going to try and show
that so you are correct this is also
going to be infinity
and we're going to try and show this um
through what i think is a really nice
method using the fundamental theorem of
arithmetic
okay so could you tell us all what the
fundamental theorem arithmetic says
pretty much like all the numbers can be
decomposed in two products of primes
exactly so if i were to give you a
number
n you could write it as p1 p2 p3 p4
etc up to some number let's say
let's say it was um p1 to the n1 p2 to
the n power of n2 because these of
course could have different powers
up to pk to the nk sure okay
and as you said this is a unique
decomposition there is a slight
simplification that we could make here
so so in this particular form we have
all of these powers
n1 n2 nk etc now if we wanted to reduce
those powers
to just be uh one
then do you know a way that we can
simplify this formula so that all of the
primes
are taken to the power one and then
there's some term left at the end
some terms we can factor things out
maybe
and then you want you're allowed to have
things at the end
yes so so the thing at the end doesn't
have to necessarily be a prime number
okay so we just look at all this and
then we just factor out for example
from here we can say factor out p1 to
the n1
minus one power right factor that out
and then just put that yet
and then we can do the same thing for
the other factors as well
so i think that's how we can do it and i
can
write that down so i said p1 purposely
already as one and then p2
and then purposely write that as one and
then so on so on so on
uh here we have pk and here is still one
and then at the end here i will have to
make things up well make
them up of course so this is n one
minus one and then same thing up to p k
and k minus one yeah there we go
perfect now um given that the numbers
n one and two up to n k they can be
um they can be one of two types of
number
so they could be odd or even as an
example take
um let's just say n one was equal to two
two m plus one sure
and if we do that then this right here
will be
even and on the other hand if this was
odd so if this was odd this would be
even if this is
even then this will be art
now what we can potentially do thinking
about this odd and even
parity is you can say well
i'm going to make all of the numbers in
the red it can all be written as square
numbers
for example if n1 is uh 2m plus 1
then when we subtract 1 we have p1 to
the 2m
which is p1 to the m all squared
yes i agree yes yeah okay and then and
if if any of the other numbers
um so if one of the powers is even
then we can just exclude it from our
list and take the whole thing
into the red bracket ah i see yes yes
so if this was even in the first place
we should not
have done that yes so that would just be
to the zero and then all of the other
powers would be inside the bracket
i okay so so what we can really say
in fact this is this is telling us that
we have
some prime numbers at the start so your
black numbers we have some numbers there
which will all be to the power one so it
might not be the full list
so let's call them uh p p i one
p i two up to p i k for example
okay p because we don't know like we've
just discussed we don't know that every
number is present there but
they will all be to the power one that's
the important thing
i see and then what would we be left
with in the red bracket
what is the simplest way of writing that
number in the red bracket
uh
oh man the index i would just write this
something to the second power in that
case right
perfect yeah so let's call it k squared
it's a square number well done yeah so
this is just let's call it k squared
okay so we'll just multiply this guy by
some k to the second pole so k is
probably if
you know if if n is a large number k is
going to also be a pretty large number
but
you know it doesn't matter it's
definitely a square number and we've
and we've considered odd and even powers
so this is always true
so both of these two statements are
completely correct so we can break it
down into
prime factors or we can have prime
numbers to the power one
and then a square number yes okay this
now has this factor of k squared which
is in our second
sum the one over n squared okay this is
the trick
this is the neat little thing that's
going to help us as we shall see
okay i'll be honest this bit is the bit
that required uh
uh like let's say sort of a gif from
above
to be able to realize what you need to
write down as your next door
so you know i i definitely wouldn't be
able to come up with this myself
until i was given the hint uh so so
basically what we want to consider
and this is going to be the final part
of the proof we want to consider the sum
from k equals one to infinity of one
divided by k squared
the whole thing multiplied by e
and the power is going to be the sum of
one over p
yeah and we're summing here for p less
than capital n
and then we're going to let n go to
infinity i don't know how you would know
to really consider that unless you were
euler or somebody else incredible
so this is our gift from above so now
thinking about this we're going to try
and hopefully we should be able to show
that um that the sum of one over p
goes to infinity so if capital n goes to
infinity
what must that whole expression be equal
to
if n goes to infinity right here then
that's your b infinity right then those
things should be yes
exactly well done so that's what we want
to show so our next task is can we show
this sum
is equal to infinity in the limit as
capital n
goes to infinity all right so just make
a note
for myself want to show that um
i'll put this as star
as capital n goes to infinity
star goes to infinity
yeah because if we show that then we
have indeed
the the sum uh must go to infinity
because we're multiplying
the exponential by something finite yes
okay yes i'm following i think i'll now
throw the ball over to you and let's see
uh how you might approach
trying to show that
all right so here's the question that i
have to answer now
so want to show as n goes to infinity
that goes to infinity and
i will try to use a comparison test
maybe
i will try to compare this with
something that we know about man
yeah now that's that's certainly going
to be helpful
and this reminds me of maybe what your
sound geometry series
if we look at this as e to some power
[Music]
maybe but i'm not quite sure how to
continue from there
i may just be looking at this for a
while and
i know what to do but to continue no
problem like
this is like i said this is one of the
the best interview questions i could
find from the last 50 years so i thought
this was
you know this is meant to be really
tough i might suggest a good starting
point would be to try and simplify
um the e to the sum because at the
moment this is a finite
sum so we've got e to a sum of numbers
and we can potentially write that
in a slightly simpler form ah
so this right here becomes k
goes from 1 to infinity 1 over
k square um e to the sum
let's say we have p1 p2 p1 plus p2 plus
w2
uh pk and e to the
sum we can just write it as
multiplication so
we can say this is e to the p1
times e to the p2 dot
e to the pk and
p k is just the primes up to uh capital
n
right so this is the expression that we
have
yes except this is one over all of those
ps
that is correct yes all right
it's very easy to get lost in the in
this problem yeah perfect so
so you've turned the sum into a product
okay so i will use the capital pi
notation
right k is equal to 1 to infinity 1 over
k squared
and to write this i will just write it
as capital pi
here and i will still use that
p less than n and we have e to the 1
over p okay yeah so
yes okay perfect
now now we're doing what you mentioned
at the beginning about a convergence
test
what do we know about the exponential
function so let's just pretend let's
just fix p
and then what is e to the one over p
equal to
sure okay so i'll make a little note
right here
we can say if we have the sum
so notice if we have the actually
already done this way
if we have e to the uh haven't used x
yes i'll use x
x this right here is the series as
oh man what should i use
uh i used n already i used p has k
that is a good one all right yeah
zero to infinity and we have x to the m
over m factorial so
if we put this down here then
really okay so we have the power series
so yeah next we can put one over p
here if we use that
and this converges for all x so i can of
course do that no problem or not
yeah we end up with a series k goes from
1 to infinity
and we have 1 over k squared and we have
capital pi and we have
p is less than n and this portion i
would just write it down
in here in blue so we have wow this is
the first time seeing a sum
and then the pi and then the sum again
so this is n goes from zero to infinity
and we have one over p goes here so
one over p raised to the m
over m factorial and perhaps we can
simplify this a little bit
by saying this is 1 on the top over p
to the m and then times n factorial but
now i will just leave you that now
yeah like you've spotted this is very
complicated at this point
so what we kind of want to do is
so you mentioned the comparison test so
rather than taking
every term in that final exponential sum
let's just take the first two for
example
okay so this right here will be bigger
than or equal to
the first two sum right so okay exactly
so yes
i'm going to just this will be strictly
bigger than because it's positive so
and then here we have the sum k
goes from one to infinity parenthesis
one over
k square and then capital
pi okay i mean p less than
n p less than
capital n so when m is equal to one this
is
one point m is equal to zero this is one
over
zero factorial which is one so we have
one and then
when m is one we get one over p
okay so we have this okay
okay okay so we have this
wow okay is that starting to look like
the thing that we had earlier when we
were talking about the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic
unfortunately it's been rubbed off the
board but we had that neat result
about any number being written using a k
squared factor ah
[Music]
yes yes yes yes oh man i wish i didn't
erase that part
here we had n being equal to um
two p i one to the first power times
p i two to the first power p
i k to the first power and then
something else
squared like this k squared yes now
this is the same as that part and
this can be together as that part yes
so the only problem is that one
right but we can just get rid of the one
and use an inequality
again okay so
i would just say if we don't have the
one this will be bigger than
the following inequality so inequality
sum k goes from one to infinity one over
k square and capital pi
and less than p which is going to be
this wow and then
one over p ah
so now this should begin to look like a
series that we know diverges
this right here is what we have to use
one over
k hold on hmm almost there almost there
almost there
yeah you should but
it's quite hard to see explicitly you
have to i think here you have to kind of
um
almost like take a step back and think
big picture
so we have we have the sum of all square
numbers
and for each one of those we're
multiplying by
a product of primes
so when we let capital n go to infinity
we actually have the sum of one over k
squared times
every sort of possible prime so this
whole sum
is greater than the sum of one over n
right we take the reciprocal of both
sides like this
exactly so in our sum we now have
something that's bigger than
the sum of one over n which of course
goes to infinity
okay it goes from one to infinity and
all this i will just
walk out though just say
oh just use black yeah which
diverges which diverges yeah
wow i told you it was tough
right yeah and
man i don't know exactly from what year
this question was but as i said i asked
all my colleagues and this came from
someone who's been teaching at the
university for over 50 years
so this is a very old interview question
that used to be asked in the past
so do you think that the questions that
they asked in the past were hard
harder than the ones that they ask
nowadays
i think they've just slightly changed is
what i would say i wouldn't say they
they are necessarily harder i think the
style of the question has changed
because i think in the past a lot of the
questions were tailored
to perhaps by accident but they were
tailored to students who'd sort of had
training or students who've been able to
do
extra extra work outside of school
whereas today of course we want to make
it fair for everybody
so a lot of this is very much beyond the
school syllabus so i wouldn't ask this
question in an interview now
because i think this would be a bit too
hard
but i think i think we could all agree
anyway i think you've definitely passed
the interview steve so i think i think
the first one was gabriel's hall was was
absolutely fantastic i think even this
this is an extremely difficult problem
and i think i think you did very very
well um so congratulations
thank you thank you thank you and
like i said i hope you've enjoyed uh
sort of doing these questions and i hope
everyone's enjoyed watching
um and had a bit of fun with the both of
us working through these problems
yes yes yes definitely it was definitely
a lot of fun and
yeah wow to be honest i've read about
this before but like at some point i
just i think i gave up when i was
reading through the questions
it's an interesting one because there
are several different ways to prove this
in fact
and then i do recommend to anyone
watching look up the other methods of
proof but
this is this i just think i happen to
find that this is a very neat
uh way to do it so again um thank you
very much
uh steve for being my willing
interviewee uh it's been great fun
and thank you everyone uh for watching
if you as i mentioned the beginning
if you haven't checked out steve's
amazing channel do head over
to black pen red pen and have a look at
all the awesome stuff
that he's doing over there and if you've
enjoyed this video do also please
subscribe
to my channel that would be awesome and
i'll be back soon with some more maths
take care thank you so much tom bye
thanks steve bye
you